---
layout:     post
title:      "KeyCLD"
subtitle:   "Learning Constrained Lagrangian Dynamics in Keypoint Coordinates from Images"
date:       2022-06-10 09:55:00
author:     "Rembert Daems"
permalink: /keycld/
header-img: img/keycld/cartpole_predictions.png
header-mask: 0.3
# header-style: text
catalog:    true
mathjax:    true
tags:
    - research
---
*Rembert Daems, Jeroen Taets, Francis wyffels, Guillaume Crevecoeur*

This paper was published in [Neurocomputing 573 (2024): 127175](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231223012985)
and presented (oral, top 1.6%) at the Machine Learning and the Physical Sciences Workshop at NeurIPS 2023.


<a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11030" class="btn btn-primary" style="color: white" role="button">paper</a>
<a href="https://github.com/rdaems/keycld" class="btn btn-primary" style="color: white" role="button">code</a>
<a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_y1RDOhyjaOTgPnXe5wxWfRcPq5K5Mhkp_GW-yM2NtA/edit?usp=sharing" class="btn btn-primary" style="color: white" role="button">slides</a>

### Abstract

We present KeyCLD, a framework to learn Lagrangian dynamics from images.
Learned keypoints represent semantic landmarks in images and can directly represent state dynamics.
Interpreting this state as Cartesian coordinates coupled with explicit holonomic constraints,
allows expressing the dynamics with a constrained Lagrangian.
KeyCLD is trained unsupervised end-to-end on sequences of images.
Our method explicitly models the mass matrix, potential energy and the input matrix, thus allowing energy based control.
We demonstrate learning of Lagrangian dynamics from images on the dm_control pendulum, cartpole and acrobot environments.
We show that KeyCLD can be learned on these systems, wether they are unactuated, underactuated or fully actuated.
Trained models are able to produce long-term video predictions, showing that the dynamics are accurately learned.
We compare with Lag-VAE, Lag-caVAE and HGN, and ablations without constraints and without Lagrangian prior.

{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/acrobot.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}
KeyCLD learns Lagrangian dynamics from images. **(a)** An observation of a dynamical
system is processed by a keypoint estimator model. **(b)** The model represents the positions of the
keypoints with a set of spatial probability heatmaps. **(c)** Cartesian coordinates are extracted using
spatial softmax and used as state representations to learn Lagrangian dynamics. **(d)** The information
in the keypoint coordinates bottleneck suffices for a learned renderer model to reconstruct the
original observation, including background, reflections and shadows. The keypoint estimator model,
Lagrangian dynamics models and renderer model are jointly learned unsupervised on sequences of
images.

### Results

KeyCLD predicts future frames for the pendulum, cartpole and acrobot environments.
Every predicted sequence is based on the
first three frames of the ground truth sequence (column 1) to estimate the
velocities. KeyCLD (column 2) is capable of making
accurate long-term predictions, including reflections and shadow.
We compare these results with ablated models and related work in literature (other columns).
See the [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11030) for more details.

{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/pendulum-actuated_29.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}

{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/cartpole-actuated_4.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}

{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/acrobot-actuated_0.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}

Learning explicit energy models allow simple and robust energy shaping control.
The videos below show we can reach a target state by leveraging the learned potential energy models, see the paper for more details.

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between; gap: 10px;">
  <div style="flex: 1; text-align: center;">
    {% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/control/pendulum.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true width="80%" %}
  </div>
  <div style="flex: 1; text-align: center;">
    {% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/control/cartpole.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true width="80%" %}
  </div>
  <div style="flex: 1; text-align: center;">
    {% include video.liquid path="assets/img/keycld/control/acrobot.mp4" class="img-fluid z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true width="80%" %}
  </div>
</div>